Quadratic forms and isometries - an Oscar (experimental) project (#2563)
oscar-system/Oscar.jl: experimental/QuadFormAndIsom/docs/src/latwithisom.md

```@meta
CurrentModule = Oscar
```

# Lattice with isometry

We call *lattice with isometry* any pair $(L, f)$ consisting of an integer
lattice $L$ together with an isometry $f \in O(L)$. We refer to the section
about integer lattices of the documentation for new users.

> On Oscar, such a pair is contained into a type called `ZZLatWithIsom`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Oscar, such a pair is encoded in the type called `ZZLatWithIsom`:
```

```@docs
ZZLatWithIsom
```

> and it is seen as a quadruple $(Vf, L, f, n)$ where $Vf = (V, f_a)$ consists on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and it is seen as a quadruple $(Vf, L, f, n)$ where $Vf = (V, f_a)$ consists of
```

the ambient rational quadratic space $V$ of $L$ and an isometry $f_a$ of $V$

> preserving $L$ and inducing $f$ on $L$. $n$ is the order of $f$, which is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
preserving $L$ and inducing $f$ on $L$. The integer $n$ is the order of $f$, which is a
```

divisor of the order of the isometry $f_a\in O(V)$.

Given a lattice with isometry $(L, f)$, we provide the following accessors to the
elements of the previously described quadruple:

```@docs
ambient_isometry(::ZZLatWithIsom)
ambient_space(::ZZLatWithIsom)
isometry(::ZZLatWithIsom)
lattice(::ZZLatWithIsom)
order_of_isometry(::ZZLatWithIsom)
```

Note that for some computations, it is more convenient to work either with the
isometry of the lattice itself, or with the fixed isometry of the ambient
quadratic space inducing it on the lattice.

## Constructor

> We provide two ways to construct a pair $Lf = (L,f)$ consisting on an integer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We provide two ways to construct a pair $Lf = (L,f)$ consisting of an integer
```

lattice endowed with an isometry. One way to construct an object of type
`ZZLatWithIsom` is through the methods `integer_lattice_with_isometry`. These

> two methods does not require as input an ambient quadratic space with isometry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two methods do not require as input an ambient quadratic space with isometry.
```

```@docs
integer_lattice_with_isometry(::ZZLat, ::QQMatrix)
integer_lattice_with_isometry(::ZZLat)
```

> By default, the first constructor will always check whether the entry matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the first constructor will always check whether the matrix
```

defines an isometry of the lattice, or its ambient space. We recommend not to
disable this parameter to avoid any further issues. Note that as in the case of

> quadratic space with isometries, both isometries of integer lattices of *finite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quadratic spaces with isometry, both isometries of integer lattices of *finite
```

order* and *infinite order* are supported.

Another way of constructing such lattices with isometry is by fixing an ambient

> quadratic space with isometry, of type `QuadSpaceWithIsom`, and specify a basis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quadratic space with isometry, of type `QuadSpaceWithIsom`, and specifying a basis
```

for an integral lattice in that space. If this lattice is preserved by the fixed
isometry of the quadratic space considered, then we endow it with the induced
action.

```@docs
lattice(::QuadSpaceWithIsom)
lattice(::QuadSpaceWithIsom, ::MatElem{ <:RationalUnion})
lattice_in_same_ambient_space(::ZZLatWithIsom, ::MatElem)
```

## Attributes and first operations

Given a lattice with isometry $Lf := (L, f)$, one can have access most of the

> attributes of $L$ and $f$ by calling the similar function to the pair. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attributes of $L$ and $f$ by calling the similar function for the pair. For
```

rational_span(::ZZLatWithIsom)
scale(::ZZLatWithIsom)
signature_tuple(::ZZLatWithIsom)
```

Similarly, some basic operations on $\mathbb Z$-lattices are available for
lattices with isometry.

```@docs
Base.:^(::ZZLatWithIsom, ::Int)
biproduct(::Vector{ZZLatWithIsom})
direct_product(::Vector{ZZLatWithIsom})
direct_sum(::Vector{ZZLatWithIsom})
dual(::ZZLatWithIsom)
lll(::ZZLatWithIsom)
rescale(::ZZLatWithIsom, ::RationalUnion)
```

## Type for finite order isometries

Given a lattice with isometry $Lf := (L, f)$ where $f$ is of finite order $n$,
one can compute the *type* of $Lf$, which can be seen as an equivalent of the
*genus* used to classified single lattices.

```@docs
type(::ZZLatWithIsom)
```

Since determining whether two pairs of lattices with isometry are isomorphic is
a challenging task, one can perform a coarser comparison by looking at the type.
This set of data keeps track of some local and global invariants of the pair $(L,
f)$ with respect to the action of $f$ on $L$.

```@docs
is_of_type(::ZZLatWithIsom, t::Dict)
is_of_same_type(::ZZLatWithIsom, ::ZZLatWithIsom)
```

Finally, if the minimal polynomial of $f$ is irreducible, then we say that the

> pair $(L, f)$ is *of hermitian type*. The type of a lattice with isometry of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pair $(L, f)$ is of *hermitian type*. The type of a lattice with isometry of
```

hermitian type is called *hermitian* (note that the type is only defined for
finite order isometries).

These namings follow from the fact that, by the trace equivalence, one can
associate to the pair $(L, f)$ a hermitian lattice over the equation order of
$f$, if it is maximal in the associated number field $\mathbb{Q}[f]$.

```@docs
is_of_hermitian_type(::ZZLatWithIsom)
is_hermitian(::Dict)
```

## Hermitian structure and trace equivalence

As mentioned in the previous section, to a lattice with isometry $Lf := (L, f)$
such that the minimal polynomial of $f$ is irreducible, one can associate a
hermitian lattice $\mathfrak{L}$ over the equation order of $f$, if it is
maximal, for which $Lf$ is the associated trace lattice. Hecke provides the tools
to perform the trace equivalence for lattices with isometry of hermitian type.

```@docs
hermitian_structure(::ZZLatWithIsom)
```

## Discriminant group

> Given an integral lattice with isometry $Lf := (L, f)$, if one denotes $D_L$ the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given an integral lattice with isometry $Lf := (L, f)$, if one denotes by $D_L$ the
```

discriminant group of $L$, there exists a natural map $\pi\colon O(L) \to O(D_L)$

> sending any isometry to its induced action on the discriminant form of $L$. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sending any isometry to its induced action on the discriminant group of $L$. In
```

> general, this map is neither injective nor surjective. If we denote $D_f :=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
general, this map is neither injective nor surjective. If we denote by $D_f :=
```

\pi(f)$ then $\pi$ induces a map between centralizers $O(L, f)\to O(D_L, D_f)$.
Again, this induced map is in general neither injective nor surjective, and we

> denote its image $G_{L,f}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
denote its image by $G_{L,f}$.
```
